this is a standalone video on jealousy
sympathy the human condition how to cope
with it you do not need to have seen any
of the prior videos on this channel to
pick up what I'm putting down I do think
that jealousy is a very important
instinct I think it's a very important
psychological and social factor in life
on Earth as we experience it on the
one-to-one level of human interactions
and when you scale it up and look at how
our society and culture operates
collectively as a whole
jealousy is a big deal and I feel I have
something to offer in talking about my
analysis of jealousy now to cope with it
even though I myself do not experience
jealousy really brief digression on that
come from a large family my father had
nine kids so it was possible for me to
compare myself to a lot of other people
who had a lot of genetic material and
come with me but who were profoundly
different in many other ways including
this instinctual experience of jealousy
as the years went by of course I also
learned this lesson in getting to
understand the psychology of my
girlfriends who of course later became
my ex-girlfriends um I got to see this
play out in the workplace with coworkers
how they experienced enacted of jealousy
how important a psychological fact this
wasn't their wives and how really alien
it was to me and me having to understand
why don't I think that way why don't I
feel this that way when for them this
was very immediate this was as immediate
to them as their experience of color
where they don't look at something in
question is that red or is that orange
they apprehend the color right away and
had seen sense they were having a
jealous instinctual response to things
the moment they saw them one of my
ex-girlfriends in particular was really
striking many many people have known are
like that I'm not like that so to some
extent talking about this I'm giving
advice that's got to be terrible because
it's like someone giving you advice on
weight loss who's never had the
experience of gaining and losing weight
I'm aware of my limits I'm aware this is
an area in which it's difficult for me
to articulate myself but it's
interesting to me that I was
misunderstood philosophically but one of
the people in the comment section from
my prior video
I think the misunderstanding is really
worth addressing in and of itself this
person misinterpreted my advice as if my
point was as if my point was
that when you meet someone who's
gorgeous someone who's very perhaps who
you feel as superior to you in terms of
their aesthetics their strength their
body that you should shift into
appraising them jealously in other
categories where you might have an
advantage I totally understand why this
person misunderstood my advice that way
so the hypothetical scenario is here you
meet someone who's a model fitness model
or body builder at the at the gym and
then you switch into a mode of shrewish
ly imagining well they must be inferior
intellectually or economically in terms
of their success in business or
education or reading ancient Greek
philosophy or something right now that
is not only can I say that's not what
I'm recommending at all to me it's
inconceivable or it wasn't conceived
before I read this that some would
misunderstand what I had to say in that
way because to me it's obvious that's
just repeating the same error but under
another heading that's playing the same
game but the context for you what do you
think you can win right and I'm saying
no no no the whole game is bad and
bankrupt and counterproductive and
psychologically unhealthy I think it's
not really hard to argue that that Envy
is a counterproductive and pointless you
know emotional response to the world
what I'm propelling here is the idea
that sympathy is an analytical tool that
we shouldn't just sympathise with other
people in order to be sympathetic
sympathy isn't an end in itself but that
sympathy leads to an appreciation of
someone in the context of their whole
life cycle what I call lifecycle
analysis that it's gonna lead you to
understand these traits where they may
be your superior they may be more
beautiful than you stronger than you
fitter than you they need more
intelligent you they may be better
educated than you they may be more
successful than you that it's gonna let
you understand that in the context of
their suffering their struggle and their
effort I may meet someone who's very
successful and has a PhD in Sanskrit I
don't feel jealous but now in my case my
specification this example it is
literally true that I could have gotten
a PhD in Sanskrit and I chose not to
write now for some people
make jealousy and envy worse because
they feel regret like I could have been
successful like this person if only I
made this choice no I don't I don't
respond that way at all and then for
other people
you know they'd never even considered
the option of getting a PhD in Sanskrit
meaning that makes the jealousy worse oh
I could have had this totally different
life if I devoted myself to this type of
intellectual historical and language
study alright um the point is when I see
them and it's not that I switched you
like oh well they've got a PhD in
Sanskrit but I can benchpress more than
them to me that's gif is repeating the
same game that's the same kind of
jealousy but you're another heading
making the same mistake twice you're
making it worse right when I meet this
person and I've met many many people
with pages in Sanskrit I can sympathize
with the sacrifices they've made in
learning the language in conformity to
the academic system in going through
this process in gaining this ability etc
in the pursuit of this form of success
that they now have or this form of
educational requirement and I can also
feel or I know that I wouldn't want to
go through that same suffering I
wouldn't want to make that same
commitment I wouldn't want to make those
same sacrifices now if you do there's a
flipside here what if you meet some of
that and you don't feel that way you
think wow I'd love to do that I'd love
to go through that process then the way
to relate to them is as a mentor is as
an exemplars as a positive example you
want to emulate not jealousy right but
for me and what I'm trying to before
sleep here is you meet these people
anything well this guy is putting in
twice as much effort at the gym maybe
he's also using steroids or testosterone
booster or whatever is the key it's
gonna be again this is about particular
instances this is not a generalized or
universal situation I'm not talking
about all Sanskrit scholars or all
bodybuilders are all professionals but
you see okay this is this guy's life
this is this is a struggle I'm seeing it
in that context and I can see a lot of
things there that to me are a Barbra t'v
their sacrifices I don't want to make
that their their efforts I don't want to
make it's a type of suffering I don't
want him to go but I can appreciate his
accomplishments I can appreciate what he
has done and who he is in this context
of his struggle or her struggle right
and that struggle is not going to be the
same in every case
is not gonna be the same for everyone
who's a model it's not gonna the same
forever wounds of Sanskrit talk but
still this I think creates a natural
limit to this jealous impulse that the
jealousy instinct so look a lot of
people misinterpreted this man and think
that I'm motivated by jealousy when I'm
not there are other youtubers who are
way more successful than I am in the
same category than I meant so you might
ask me you want to ask me aisel do you
feel jealous of unnatural vegan
unnatural vegan has a YouTube channel
that I think is in the same category is
mine broadly speaking she's way more
successful to me she has more viewers
than I do she's a bigger voice bigger
platform
I don't feel jealous of her at all there
are many reasons I think so I think
someone who has the jealous personality
type is stuck in the jealous cycle there
in my situations way they would think
thoughts like this person is more
attractive than me
doubtless true they might feel this
person is more intelligent me and feel
Jos they might feel this person is less
intelligent than me and feel jealous
anyway because then they feel like the
fame is or the success is undeserved
kind of no matter which traits they
fastened on in their mind it's only
going to provide more fuel for for
jealousy for the joy sense thing and I
believe that is because they're taking
these traits they're isolating them
they're abstracting them it is if you
like for my perspective a type of
religious mentality and what I do is the
opposite I don't see these as isolated
traits at all I'm integrating them into
that person's whole life cycle I'm
thinking about this in a way that's
sympathetic and analytical I look at
this other channel that's more
successful than mine I can see the
struggle I can see the hard work that
got those results I don't want to do
that hard work I I literally I don't
want to make a single video sitting and
doing a product review and smiling and
pandering to the audience which he's
done dozens of times countless times I
don't want to go through the process
that built up her her viewership and the
way in which she reaches out to people I
don't want to make the kind of phony
content she makes I don't want to do any
of the things she does but again as I
said earlier with the sanskrit scholar
conversely if i do if i see that and
think wow that's just what i want my
channel to be like then i would regard
her as a mentor as an example are
someone i could learn from as someone
who
a lot to teach me and I'm still not
gonna feel jealousy you see that but
seeing her success in the context of
that cycle of suffering striving and
suffering an effort I think really
changes how you regard these isolated
qualities you see them in that you see
them in a different way and I think it's
gonna change how you feel about them and
and how you respond to them now somebody
else wrote in saying that they think the
issue here is the difference between
perceiving things as inequalities versus
acquired qualities that's that's an
interesting theory but especially when
we're talking about about human beauty
of attractiveness it's not the same as
learning Sanskrit or learning Chinese
yeah there are innate qualities like
whether or not you're born with dyslexia
is gonna profoundly impact your ability
to learn Sanskrit your builder in
Chinese even your ability to learn
English in French that there are any
characteristics that matter in language
acquisition there are any
characteristics that matter in how
successful your your YouTube channel is
but there we're talking about a domain
that's mostly about acquired
characteristics effort and
accomplishment and there's no doubt that
in terms of human attractiveness it's
that were predominantly talking about
about characters that really are innate
and unearned even if you had to work
hard to maintain your attractiveness
that's different from trying to achieve
it when you start out ugly when you
start out with a deformed face deform
body with with different aesthetic
disadvantages so there's an interesting
point that someone else wrote into me
but I think it's salience to this
discussion is is is limited now out of
left field for a lot of you here another
thing that I feel is related to this is
my own nihilist philosophy and I don't
know to what extent
I don't experience jealousy today
because of something innate and
instinctual me and to what extent it's
because of my own peculiar philosophy
that's shaped the way I see the world
the way I feel about these things
someone comment to me recently this will
seem totally unrelated philosophically
someone demanded to know why it is that
I as a nihilist want to conserve nature
intact like when I talk about
conservation of a forest
I want the forest to basically that
remain the way it would be without human
intervention to the greatest extent
possible there are limits to that throw
it into the footnotes
not gonna cut that in this video but
this person was demanding to know if it
was possible for me to do something
morally positive and reduce harm reduce
suffering within the forest if we could
have human intervention in the forest
that for example prevents bears from
engaging in cannibalism against other
bears or another example prevents wolves
from killing their fellow wolves which
happens in the wild which maybe you
could you could prevent by just
separating the animals making sure
they're distributed more evenly within
the this park instead of being clustered
together something if you could
intervene to rob nature of its of its
sting shall we say to reduce the amount
of suffering why wouldn't you modify
nature you want to know especially if
you're a nihilist if you don't believe
in nature as some kind of abstract
having some kind of you know religious
value and part of my answer this is my
whole answer but one part of my answer
would say look I have to let you know I
don't believe in your concept of better
when you say better I feel like you're
using a religious concept that I don't
believe in and I can't believe in and
that is because there's such a
simplification and abstraction from the
complexity and richness and suffering of
reality and is the same thing if you
meet someone at the gym and you just
feel that they are better than you who
you just regard this person this path
you if you meet someone in the ph.d
program at the University and you just
feel that they're better than you um I
know jealousy I mean I'm not saying
jealousy is a religious mode of thinking
but I think I've so far just talked
about how an anal analysis and sympathy
has to reach outward I have to look at
this person analytically and
sympathetically and understand their
whole life cycle but this is one sense
in which your analysis has to reach
import what is it you mean what is it
you're thinking what is it you're doing
when you construe and posit this idea of
better because it's it's not something
simple and self-evident this person has
their life they're born with some
advantages and disadvantages they go
through these struggles they made these
choices they have to live with these
consequences and they're elements of
risk and regret and fall there there's a
lot there to relate to and you know your
or you're abstracting from that this
resented kernel of better and worse
there's a there's a process there sorry
philosophical parlance there's
hypostasis ation there that I think you
can you know you you can break down
analytically psychological I think you
can overcome that that habit that that
turn of mind okay guys I think that's
all about to say in this video my advice
again is not to shift your focus from
thinking about someone in the way in
which they're superior to you like oh
this person's sexier than me or fitter
than me listen or me to a context of
thinking of imagining imagining some
other ladder of values where they're in
fear you that is decidedly not my point
at all
my advice is directed towards overcoming
this creation of ladders of value of
people being better than you and you're
being inferior these feelings of of an
inferiority through a type of
sympathetic feeling because as I say
again again I think the primary value of
sympathy is as an analytical tool and in
the context of overcoming jealousy it's
an analytical tool or pardon me it's an
analytical tool that leads us to both a
greater understanding of others and I
think a greater understanding of
ourselves